[Datasets] Revise "Key Concepts" page (#33066)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/data/key-concepts.rst

Datasets
--------

A :term:`Dataset <Dataset (object)>` contains a list of Ray object references to :term:`blocks <Block>`.

> Each block holds a set of items in a `Arrow table <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/data.html#tables>`_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each block holds a set of items in an `Arrow table <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/data.html#tables>`_,
```

> `pandas DataFrame <https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/frame.html>`_, or Python list.

Reviewer 2: capitalize for consistency with Arrow table? 
```suggestion
`Pandas DataFrame <https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/frame.html>`_, or Python list.
```

Author: I don't think. pandas doesn't capitalized the name in their own documentation, whereas Arrow does.

Having multiple blocks in a dataset allows for parallel transformation and ingest.

> For ML use cases, Datasets also natively supports mixing :ref:`Tensor <datasets_tensor_support>` and tabular data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For ML use cases, Datasets also natively supports mixing :ref:`Tensors <datasets_tensor_support>` and tabular data.
```

There are three types of datasets:

> * :term:`Simple datasets <Simple Dataset>` -- Datasets that represents a collection of Python objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :term:`Simple datasets <Simple Dataset>` -- Datasets that represent a collection of Python objects
```

* :term:`Tabular datasets <Tabular Dataset>` -- Datasets that represents columnar data

> * :term:`Tensor datasets <Tensor Dataset>` -- Datasets that represents a collection of ndarrays

Reviewer 2: should we remove this? we want to hide this type of information from the user right?

Author: I think we should keep it for now.

We mention the terms frequently throughout the documentation, so it might be confusing if we don't define them.

> * :term:`Tensor datasets <Tensor Dataset>` -- Datasets that represents a collection of ndarrays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :term:`Tensor datasets <Tensor Dataset>` -- Datasets that represent a collection of ndarrays
```

> The following figure visualizes a tabular dataset with three blocks, each block holding 1000 rows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following figure visualizes a tabular dataset with three blocks, each holding 1000 rows:
```

Reading Data
============

> Datasets uses Ray tasks to read data from remote storage. Each read task reads its assigned files and produces an output block:

Reviewer 3: Nit: Not sure if "assigned" is the right term here, since it will probably create some not-so-useful questions in the user's mind - who "assigns" the files to a task, do I need to worry about doing that, etc.

Maybe something like "Each read task reads one or more files and produces an output block"? Also I feel like we should call out that this is a parallel read.

```suggestion
Datasets uses Ray tasks to read data from remote storage in parallel. Each read task reads one or more files and produces an output block:
```

> Datasets uses Ray tasks to read data from remote storage. When you read from a file-based datasource like S3, Datasets creates a number of read tasks proportional to the number of CPUs in the cluster. Each read task reads its assigned files and produces an output block:

Reviewer 4: > Datasets creates a number of read tasks proportional to the number of CPUs in the cluster

Here, what do you think about clarifying that this is the `parallelism` value that is being automatically being set/used? (To keep consistent with the next paragraph which talks about manually setting this value)

Reviewer 2: +1

> creates a number of read tasks proportional to the number of CPUs in the cluster

is not always true right?

Author: Yeah, looks like the `parallelism` estimation is also based on memory sizes:

```
    min_safe_parallelism = 1
    max_reasonable_parallelism = sys.maxsize
    if reader:
        mem_size = reader.estimate_inmemory_data_size()
        if mem_size is not None and not np.isnan(mem_size):
            min_safe_parallelism = max(1, int(mem_size / ctx.target_max_block_size))
            max_reasonable_parallelism = max(
                1, int(mem_size / ctx.target_min_block_size)
            )
    else:
        mem_size = None
    if parallelism < 0:
        if parallelism != -1:
            raise ValueError("`parallelism` must either be -1 or a positive integer.")
        # Start with 2x the number of cores as a baseline, with a min floor.
        avail_cpus = avail_cpus or _estimate_avail_cpus(cur_pg)
        parallelism = max(
            min(ctx.min_parallelism, max_reasonable_parallelism),
            min_safe_parallelism,
            avail_cpus * 2,
        )
        logger.debug(
            f"Autodetected parallelism={parallelism} based on "
            f"estimated_available_cpus={avail_cpus} and "
            f"estimated_data_size={mem_size}."
        )
    return parallelism, min_safe_parallelism
```

Author: Removed the sentence

.. image:: images/dataset-read.svg
   :align: center

..
  https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/15B4TB8b5xN15Q9S8-s0MjW6iIvo_PrH7JtV1fL123pU/edit

> You can manually specify the number of read tasks, but the final parallelism is always capped by the number of files in the underlying dataset.

Reviewer 3: Nit: Should we still mention that the default parallelism will be proportional to the number of CPUs in the cluster? I feel like this is useful to convey, but not sure if it should be in the key concepts or just the creating datasets feature guide.

Author: The default parallelism isn't always proportional to the number of CPUs, right? For example, if there are fewer files than CPUs, then the parallelism is the number of files. 

Related discussion: https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/33066#discussion_r1127102631

For an in-depth guide on creating datasets, read :ref:`Creating Datasets <creating_datasets>`.

Transforming Data
=================

> Datasets use either Ray tasks or Ray actors to transform datasets. By default, Datasets uses tasks.

Reviewer 3: "Datasets" is singular, and Datasets uses task/actors to transform data/blocks, not datasets.
```suggestion
Datasets uses either Ray tasks or Ray actors to transform data blocks. By default, Datasets uses tasks.
```

To use Actors, pass an :class:`ActorPoolStrategy` to ``compute`` in methods like
:meth:`~ray.data.Dataset.map_batches`. :class:`ActorPoolStrategy` creates an autoscaling
pool of Ray actors. This allows you to cache expensive state initialization
(e.g., for GPU-based tasks).

.. image:: images/dataset-map.svg
   :align: center
..
  https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/12STHGV0meGWfdWyBlJMUgw7a-JcFPu9BwSOn5BjRw9k/edit

For an in-depth guide on transforming datasets, read :ref:`Transforming Datasets <transforming_datasets>`.

Shuffling Data
==============

Operations like :meth:`~ray.data.Dataset.sort` and :meth:`~ray.data.Dataset.groupby`

> require blocks to be partitioned by value or *shuffled*. Datasets uses tasks to shuffle blocks in a map-reduce

Author: Like in the glossary?

> require blocks to be partitioned by value or *shuffled*. Datasets uses tasks to shuffle blocks in a map-reduce

Author: Created issue to track: https://github.com/ray-project/ray/issues/33220

style: map tasks partition blocks by value and then reduce tasks merge co-partitioned
blocks.

Call :meth:`~ray.data.Dataset.repartition` to change the number of blocks.
Repartition has two modes:

* ``shuffle=False`` - performs the minimal data movement needed to equalize block sizes
* ``shuffle=True`` - performs a full distributed shuffle

.. image:: images/dataset-shuffle.svg
   :align: center

..
  https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/132jhE3KXZsf29ho1yUdPrCHB9uheHBWHJhDQMXqIVPA/edit

Datasets can shuffle hundreds of terabytes of data. For an in-depth guide on shuffle performance, read :ref:`Performance Tips and Tuning <shuffle_performance_tips>`.

Execution mode
==============

> Datasets is lazy. The library doesn't execute operations until you

Reviewer 2: plural?

```suggestion
Datasets are lazy. The library doesn't execute operations until you
```

Reviewer 2: cc @jianoaix to confirm if all operations are now lazy...I think there are still operations that are not.

we should explicitly list the ones that are not.

Author: Meant Datasets as in the library, but Datasets as in the Python object might make more sense.

Reviewer 5: We are using "operations" to cover both transformation and consumption, so only the transformations are meant to be lazy (consumption calls are to trigger the execution), and they are lazy by default already. There are exceptions, like `Union` is still eager.

Reviewer 2: Got it, can we explicitly list out the current exceptions?

Maybe something similar to the @ConsumptionAPI annotations that we have for the current API?

Author: Could we list exceptions and add a decorator in a follow-up PR?

Reviewer 2: Keeping it as "most transformations are lazy" is fine

:meth:`Dataset.fully_executed() <ray.data.Dataset.fully_executed>`.

For an in-depth guide on Datasets execution, read :ref:`Execution <datasets_execution>`.

Fault tolerance
===============

Datasets performs *lineage reconstruction* to recover data. If an application error or
hardware failure occurs, Datasets recreates lost blocks by re-executing tasks.

Fault tolerance isn't supported in two cases:

* If the original worker process that created the Dataset dies. This is because the creator stores the metadata for the :ref:`objects <object-fault-tolerance>` that comprise the Dataset.

> * If ``compute=ActorPoolStrategy()`` is specified for transformations. This is because Datasets relies on :ref:`task-based fault tolerance <task-fault-tolerance>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If  you specify ``compute=ActorPoolStrategy()`` for transformations. This is because Datasets relies on :ref:`task-based fault tolerance <task-fault-tolerance>`.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if this mangles the meaning...

> * If  you specify ``compute=ActorPoolStrategy()`` for transformations. This is because Datasets relies on :ref:`task-based fault tolerance <task-fault-tolerance>`.

Reviewer 3: @ericl This isn't the case if the pool actors are started with `max_restarts` and `max_retries`, right? I've also been wondering if we should set `max_restarts=-1` and `max_retries=-1` by default for the pool actors, and document that the `CallableClass` construction and calls should be idempotent.

> * If ``compute=ActorPoolStrategy()`` is specified for transformations.

Reviewer 4: should we add a reason for why this is unsupported this as well, similar to the first point? Is it because Datasets is relying on task-based fault tolerance?

Reviewer 2: +1
